---
layout: post
title: Making a Better Movie Visualization
published: false
enable_latex: false
permalink: /movie_vis
frontpage: true
technical: true
funstuff: true
---

# Introduction
This is a critique, for reaons, exploration of an alternative visualization 

IGNORING THE ***INCREDIBLY*** COMMERCIAL ASPECTS OF THESE VISUALIZATIONS

# Critique 

These visualizations feel more like **art** rather than **data**. There's nothing wrong with that, it's a movie visualization, but I feel like it's not a *complete* data visualization.


Some of my critiques is that they arbitrarily normalize all these movies to the same length (i.e removing movie length), and averages colors for the sake of prettiness.

These visualizations opt to show variance in the visualizations through time (i.e like a scatter plot) 

### Problem with Averages
Even though these 1px slices seem to represent color schmes and motifs in the film, it doens't capture the beauty/variety of colors. **In a sense - they fail to show variance**

Averages are a fine representation of color, and do accurately represent our understanding of colors. EX Mixing Pure Red and Green gives us [COLOR], Pure Blakc and Pure White gives us Grey.

However, this average doesn't let us understand how "colorful" a movie is, or how a scene will employ a variety of colors at once.


My problem is that averages don't represent the variety of color (or variation).


The other visualization (Bicubic downsampling of each frame) seems to do a better job - displaying the average of the rows in each image, it only provides averages of the rows in the frame, but not the variety in the colors used in the frame. 

### Not Encoding Time
normalize all these movies to the same length (i.e removing movie length)

# Color is very confusing

# Color Spaces 

# Making Movies more Computable/ Computaitonaly Tractable

# The Machine Learning Bit; COlor Quanitization with K Means

# Conclusion & Next Steps

I'd like to apply a TF-IDF weighting scheme to this movie catalog - 

WHere colors (r,g,b) act as words and a "document" would be a movie. 



This way, we are able to emphasize/pickout colors that are unique to a movie, and ignoring excessively common colors (i.e (0,0,0), (255, 255, 255)) 

https://nateaff.com/2017/09/11/lego-topic-models/#:~:text=Color%20TF%2DIDF&text=In%20text%20mining%2C%20stop%20words,the%20majority%20of%20brick%20colors.

https://www.kaggle.com/nateaff/finding-lego-color-themes-with-topic-models