---
layout: post
title: Restrospective&#58; Recurrent Neural Networks for Chord Progression
subtitle: Uncommon Hacks (2018)
published: false
enable_latex: false
enable_d3: false
permalink: music_gru
frontpage: false
technical: true
funstuff: true
tags:
  - ml
  - data-sci
  - music
  - programming
  - python
  - art
concepts:
  - machine learning
  - music
  - hackathon
---

# Introduction

This is a brief retrospective of a hackathon project (link to repo here) I did two years ago with two of my friends. 

I've always meant to do this, but I was too lazy


The full pipeline worked line this: 
1. Train a model to learn chord progressions
2. Feed the model a key and let the model generate chords endlessly
3. Use MIDI parsing libraries to turn them into chord progressions


# Background

I'm a bit too lazy to find a citation at the moment, but when I was learning Jazz Piano, my teacher desc


An infamous story is that Mile Davis and his 

## Music Theory & Practice

Keys
Chords


## Background Literature

The background literature on machine learning + music is much more complex than this. There have been much more sophisticated approaches with more interesting results. 


## Why Recurrent Neural Networks?

## Why GRUs?

The forget gates are helpful - the model can overlearn the 


# Engineering

## Keras & Tensorflow


## Chord Progression Normalization 

One of the few technique I was "proud of".

It's common to have the same chord progressions across multiple 


We would represent these as numbers, where "1" would represent the base key (like C) and where "2", "3", etc would be represented as D & E. 


## OverFitting & Temperature

It turns out that a lot of popular music is very boring. 


## MIT Library & MIDI


 
# Conclusion 

In conclusion it was "successful", but honestly success had no clear metric - if the item worked


# FAQ

## Why Music?

I like Music. In addition, playing music (especially) is much more abstracted than something like computer vision. Explaining how to play an instrument is much more explainable and clear than explaining how to recognize objects. 

## Why Chord Progression?


## What's the possible use of this 

Not much - but I think cranking up the 


## Why LSTM-Like Models?

I thought LSTMs would be fitting because they can process sequences of information (chords).
- LSTMs learn by processing data in both "short-term" and "long-term" memory, similar to how one would compose music. 

- One way we can interpret the short-term aspect is that we're thinking about the previous 3-4 chords, and figuring out what we should play next (from past experience listening to music)

- One way we can interpret the long-term aspect is that we're thinin gbaout the chords in the song as a whole - and generating the next chords (i.e using the key of the song to play the next chord)